feat: Implement automatic GitLab access token rotation (#2820)
tektoncd/pipelines-as-code: docs/content/docs/providers/gitlab.md

Store the generated token in a safe place, or you will have to recreate it.

{{< callout type="info" >}}
Give the token an expiration date. As long as it has the `api` scope (or
`self_rotate` on newer GitLab versions), Pipelines-as-Code will rotate it
automatically before it expires. See
[Automatic Token Rotation](#automatic-token-rotation).
{{< /callout >}}

> 

Reviewer: Given the behaviour is disabled by default, wouldn't this callout be a bit misleading?
Maybe
```
Give the token an expiration date. When
[automatic token rotation](#automatic-token-rotation) is enabled,
Pipelines-as-Code will rotate it before it expires as long as it has the
`api` scope (or `self_rotate` on newer GitLab versions).
```

Author: Agreed, the callout was misleading given the feature is off by default. Applied your suggested wording in 57043d8a4.

This works for Personal Access Tokens and Project Access Tokens. The token must have the `api` scope (or the `self_rotate` scope available in newer GitLab versions).

Automatic rotation is **disabled by default**. If the token does not have the required scope for self-rotation, the rotation is silently skipped and webhook processing continues normally.

In the future, this behavior may become enabled by default.

Automatic rotation does not run for `git_provider.secret` values inherited from the global Repository. Global Repository secrets are shared configuration and must be rotated manually, for example by updating the global secret with `kubectl` or the process you use to manage controller-wide credentials.

### Enabling Automatic Rotation

To enable automatic token rotation for a repository, set `token_auto_rotation` to `true`:

```yaml
spec:
  settings:
    gitlab:
      token_auto_rotation: true
```

To enable it by default for repositories that do not set a local value, set it on the global Repository CR.

When both global and repository settings are present, the repository-level value takes precedence.

### How It Works

> 1. On each incoming webhook event, Pipelines-as-Code calls the GitLab [token self-introspection API](https://docs.gitlab.com/api/personal_access_tokens/#self-inform) to check the token's expiry.

Reviewer 2: not only on every webhook event,  but on every reconciliation loop in watcher as well. and it would increase api consumption per iteration of setclient. keeping that in mind, should we add caching for tokens `ns/repo` as key?

Author: Good point — introspection would indeed fire on every `SetClient`, including each watcher reconciliation iteration. I've posted suggestions on `token_rotation.go` adding exactly that: a per-repository cache keyed by `ns/repo`, expiry-aware with a 1-hour TTL cap, plus a SHA-256 hash of the token in the entry so a manually updated secret invalidates the cache automatically. Cache hits skip the introspection call entirely; the entry is refreshed after a successful rotation.

```suggestion
1. When Pipelines-as-Code sets up the GitLab client (on webhook events and watcher reconciliation loops), it calls the GitLab [token self-introspection API](https://docs.gitlab.com/api/personal_access_tokens/#self-inform) to check the token's expiry. The result is cached per repository (for up to 1 hour, invalidated if the token changes), so repeated events don't each trigger an API call.
```

This works for Personal Access Tokens and Project Access Tokens. The token must have the `api` scope (or the `self_rotate` scope available in newer GitLab versions).

Automatic rotation is **disabled by default**. If the token does not have the required scope for self-rotation, the rotation is silently skipped and webhook processing continues normally.

In the future, this behavior may become enabled by default.

Automatic rotation does not run for `git_provider.secret` values inherited from the global Repository. Global Repository secrets are shared configuration and must be rotated manually, for example by updating the global secret with `kubectl` or the process you use to manage controller-wide credentials.

### Enabling Automatic Rotation

To enable automatic token rotation for a repository, set `token_auto_rotation` to `true`:

```yaml
spec:
  settings:
    gitlab:
      token_auto_rotation: true
```

To enable it by default for repositories that do not set a local value, set it on the global Repository CR:

```yaml
spec:
  settings:
    gitlab:
      token_auto_rotation: true

> ```

Reviewer 2: I think this example is redundant just above line is sufficient

Author: Agreed, the duplicated example was removed in 57043d8a4; the text now just points at the global Repository CR.
